                                          Latent Action Pretraining Through World Modeling
                                                                  Bahey Tharwat1                    Yara Nasser2   Ali Abouzeid1              Ian Reid1
                                                      1 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
                                                                                     2 Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt




arXiv:2509.18428v2 [cs.RO] 13 Jun 2026
                                             (a) Pretraining stage on human demonstrations videos                     (b) Finetuning stage with robotic actions on downstream tasks



                                         Figure 1: From human demonstrations to robot actions. Our framework uses human demonstration
                                         videos for pretraining, then finetunes the pretrained model on robot actions for downstream tasks.


                                                    Abstract: Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models have gained popularity for
                                                    learning robotic manipulation tasks that follow language instructions. State-of-
                                                    the-art VLAs, such as OpenVLA and π0 , were trained on large-scale, manually la-
                                                    beled action datasets collected through teleoperation. More recent approaches, in-
                                                    cluding LAPA and villa-X, introduce latent action representations that enable un-
                                                    supervised pretraining on unlabeled datasets by modeling abstract visual changes
                                                    between frames. Although these methods have shown strong results, their large
                                                    model sizes make deployment in real-world settings challenging. In this work,
                                                    we propose LAWM, a model-agnostic framework to pretrain imitation learning
                                                    models in a self-supervised way, by learning latent action representations from
                                                    unlabeled video data through world modeling. These videos can be sourced from
                                                    robot recordings or videos of humans performing actions with everyday objects.
                                                    Our framework is able to transfer learned knowledge across tasks, environments,
                                                    and embodiments. It outperforms models pretrained with ground-truth robot ac-
                                                    tions and other similar pretraining methods on the LIBERO benchmark and real-
                                                    world setup, while being efficient and practical for real-world settings.

                                         1   Introduction

                                         Self-supervised learning has been a key enabler of recent breakthroughs in Large Language Models
                                         (LLMs) such as ChatGPT [1] and Gemini [2], where models learn from large amounts of text on
                                         the Internet. Inspired by this success, the robotics community is now ready for its own transfor-
                                         mative moment, where we can build systems that learn action representations directly from raw,
                                         unstructured video data, rather than relying on curated action labels.
                                         Most current approaches to robot learning are heavily based on supervised learning frameworks.
                                         Methods like imitation learning and VLA models, including OpenVLA [3] and π0 [4], require paired
                                         image action datasets often obtained through teleoperation. These action annotations are expensive
                                         to collect, difficult to scale, and prone to bias, limiting the generalizability of these systems across
                                         tasks, environments, and embodiments.
                                         In this work, we introduce LAWM, a Latent Action pretraining framework through World Modeling
                                         that aims to overcome these limitations by combining an Imitation Learning Model with a World
                                                               zₜ
                                                                            ..
                                    Imitation Learning                      .
             Input Image                                            zₜ₊ₙ₋₂
                                          Model
                                                                       zₜ₊ₙ₋₁                               Input Image

          Move the blue thing                                               Multi-step                                                                   aₜ
                                                                                                                                                                      ..
                                                                     Action Latents Prediction           Pick the blue cup                                            .
                                                                                                                                   Imitation Learning
         Language Instruction                                                                          and place it in the bowl                               aₜ₊ₙ₋₂
                                                                                                                                         Model
                                                                                                                                                                  aₜ₊ₙ₋₁
                                                                                                        Language Instruction
                                                                                                                                                                       Multi-step
                                                                                                                                                                    Action Prediction
                                       World Model


                                                                                                            Robot state
    n-frames (t → t+n-1)                                                    n-frames (t+1 → t+n)
                                a) Latent Action Pretraining                                                                      b) Action Finetuning




Figure 2: Overview of LAWM, which consists of two stages: (a) Latent Action Pretraining, where
an imitation learning model predicts latent actions zt:t+n−1 from input images and language instruc-
tions. These latents are paired with video frames and jointly optimized with a world model through
next-frame prediction. (b) Action Finetuning, where the pretrained imitation learning model is
adapted to downstream robotic tasks using labeled demonstrations, mapping observations (images,
language instructions, and robot state) to ground-truth actions at:t+n−1 .


Model. Our objective, as shown in Figure 1, is to learn action representations from both robot-
collected and human demonstration videos in a fully self-supervised way. These learned representa-
tions serve as action priors that can be effectively leveraged during finetuning on downstream tasks.
The proposed framework, illustrated in Figure 2, is designed to be model-agnostic, meaning that it
does not depend on any specific architecture for the imitation learning model or the world model.
This flexibility allows for the integration of a variety of different models.
Our pipeline follows a two-stage approach. The first stage performs end-to-end self-supervised
pretraining, where the learning signal comes from next-frame prediction in video sequences. Given
an image frame from a human or robot manipulation task and a language instruction, the imitation
learning model predicts action chunk representations. These n latent actions are used to roll out the
world model sequentially from the current frame, predicting each future frame step by step. The
second stage finetunes only the imitation learning model on labeled downstream data, while the
world model is discarded. As a result, the imitation learning model benefits from a robust prior
learned from large-scale unlabeled videos and can be adapted efficiently to downstream robot tasks.
We summarize our main contributions and findings below:

            • We propose LAWM, a model-agnostic framework, to learn action chunk representations
              for imitation learning models from both robot and human videos without action labels.

            • Our experiments show that our framework can learn superior action priors from human
              demonstrations and robotic manipulation videos without using ground-truth action labels.

            • We demonstrate that our framework with small models such as Diffusion Policy [5] and
              DreamerV3 [6] outperforms methods such as villa-X [7] on the LIBERO benchmark [8].



2     Related Work

Recent advances in Vision-Language Models (VLMs) trained on large-scale internet text, image,
and video datasets have paved the way in Robotics for Vision-Language-Navigation (VLN) mod-
els [9, 10, 11, 12] and for Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models [13, 4, 14, 3]. These mod-
els extend VLMs by grounding multimodal reasoning in robotic action spaces, enabling robots
to follow natural language instructions and generalize to new tasks. Datasets such as Open X-
Embodiment [14] advance this direction by unifying multi-robot datasets, which supports large-scale
models like OpenVLA [3].


                                                                                                   2
2.1   Imitation Learning

Imitation learning methods leverage demonstrations to directly map observations to actions, en-
abling robots to learn from expert behavior. At the large-scale end of the spectrum, OpenVLA [3] is
a 7B parameter VLA model with dual visual encoders (DINOv2 [15] and SigLIP [16]). It is trained
on the Open X-Embodiment [14] dataset with 970k real robot demonstrations. Similarly, π0 [4] is
a 3.3B parameter VLA model that leverages a pretrained VLM backbone to inherit Internet-scale
knowledge. Taking a contrasting lightweight approach, BAKU [17] is a compact 7M parameter
model that fuses multimodal inputs: vision, proprioception, and task instructions through a FiLM-
conditioned encoder [18] and MLPs. Its observation trunk can be either an MLP or a causal trans-
former decoder to output actions. Another line of work explores action generation through genera-
tive modeling. Diffusion Policy [5] frames robot control as a conditional denoising diffusion process
that refines noisy action sequences into smooth trajectories. Building on temporal reasoning, Action
Chunking Transformer (ACT) [19] tackles long-horizon planning by predicting ’chunks’ of future
actions instead of single steps, reducing error accumulation and improving efficiency in long tasks.


2.2   World Models

World models learn representations of environment dynamics to support planning and control in em-
bodied agents. DIAMOND [20] is a diffusion-based world model that shows strong performance
in gaming environments such as CSGO. In contrast, Dreamer world models family [21, 22, 6]
implements a more sophisticated approach through its Recurrent State-Space Model (RSSM) ar-
chitecture, which encodes input states into stochastic representations and uses a recurrent sequence
model to predict future states given past actions. This RSSM framework enables the agent to learn a
world model of its environment and leverage it to plan by imagining potential future trajectories, fa-
cilitating efficient planning and policy learning in high-dimensional control tasks. Dreamerv3 offers
flexible scalability with model sizes ranging from 1 million to 200 million parameters.


2.3   Latent Action Methods

Early works explored the pretraining of vision encoders [23] on egocentric human videos [24], re-
targeting human motions to robots [25], or predicting actions from inverse dynamics models [26].
Latent action models in simulation and video games [27, 28] showed that abstract action spaces im-
prove generalization, but remained limited to non-robotic domains. Building on these foundations,
LAPA [29] introduced a 7B-parameter Vision-Language-Action model that learns latent actions
through a three-stage pipeline, enabling training from unlabeled videos. However, it suffers from
framework complexity, inference latency, and high computational cost. UniVLA [30] proposes
learning cross-embodiment vision-language-action policies by deriving task-centric latent action
representations from unlabeled videos. This method addresses task-irrelevant visual noise by decou-
pling task-relevant dynamics through a two-stage training approach that leverages DINOv2 features
and language conditioning. While UniVLA achieves state-of-the-art results with improved compu-
tational efficiency, it still relies on relatively large models (7B-parameter Prismatic VLM backbone).
More recently, Villa-X [7] improves upon LAPA by integrating a proprioceptive forward-dynamics
model (FDM) into its Latent Action Model (LAM). This auxiliary component predicts future robot
joint angles and gripper states from latent tokens. villa-X demonstrated better performance than
LAPA on the SIMPLER benchmark [31], though it still requires the latent action module during
finetuning and remains computationally expensive.


3     Method

LAWM consists of two stages: Latent Action Pretraining and Action Fine-tuning.


                                                  3
3.1   Latent Action Pretraining

The pretraining stage, illustrated in Figure 2, is model-agnostic and trained end-to-end in a self-
supervised way. This allows flexible integration of imitation learning and world model architectures.
Given a current image frame xt and a language instruction c, the imitation learning model ILθ
predicts a sequence of n latent actions:

                                            zt:t+n−1 = ILθ (xt , c),                                    (1)

where zt+n−1 = zt , zt+1 , . . . , zt+n−1 denotes the predicted latent action sequence. These latent actions
are not supervised by ground-truth robot actions. Instead, they are used as inputs to the world
model. Specifically, the world model WMφ is initialized from the current frame xt and rolled out
sequentially with the n predicted latent actions to predict the next n frames:

                                  x̂t+1:t+n = WMφ (xt:t+n−1 , zt:t+n−1 ) .                              (2)

Thus, the model is trained by predicting the shifted future frames xt+1+n step by step from the current
frame and the latent actions predicted by ILθ .
In our implementation, WMφ is instantiated as a recurrent state-space model (RSSM), following
DreamerV3 [6]. At each rollout step k ∈ {1, . . . , n}, the model updates a deterministic recurrent
state ht+k using the previous state ŝt+k−1 and latent action zt+k−1 . It then predicts a stochastic latent
state and reconstructs the next frame:


                                      ht+k = fφ (ŝt+k−1 , zt+k−1 ) ,                                   (3)
                                      ut+k ∼ qφ (ut+k | ht+k , xt+k ) ,                                 (4)
                                      ût+k ∼ pφ (ût+k | ht+k ) ,                                      (5)
                                      x̂t+k ∼ pφ (x̂t+k | ŝt+k ) .                                     (6)

Here, ŝt+k = (ht+k , ût+k ), where ut+k denotes the internal stochastic state of the world model. The
posterior qφ and prior pφ are modeled as categorical distributions.
The imitation learning model ILθ and world model WMφ are optimized jointly using a next-frame
reconstruction objective. The training signal is the MSE loss between the predicted frames and the
ground-truth frames. Following RSSM-based world models, we also include a KL regularization
term between posterior and prior latent distributions, weighted by β . The final objective is:

                                           1 n
                            L (θ , φ ) =     ∑ ∥xt+k − x̂t+k ∥22 + β| LKL
                                           n k=1
                                                                          (φ ) .
                                                                       {z }
                                                                                                        (7)
                                           |      {z          } KL Regularizer
                                                  MSE loss

This training objective encourages ILθ to produce latent actions that are useful for predicting next
frames, thereby grounding the learned action representation in the environment dynamics without
requiring ground-truth action supervision.

3.2   Action Finetuning

Following the self-supervised pretraining stage, we then proceed to a finetuning stage where the
training signal is derived from supervised learning with ground-truth actions. In this stage, the world
model is no longer used. Instead, the pretrained imitation learning model (in our case, BAKU [17]
or Diffusion Policy [5]) is trained on specific downstream tasks to adapt it to the target environment.
The pretrained model benefits from a robust prior obtained in the pretraining stage from large-
scale unlabeled video data, which enables efficient finetuning on labeled datasets. Finetuning can


                                                       4
                             Instruction: Pick the blue cup and place it in the bowl which is on top of the plate




                                         Instruction: Stack the blue cup on top of the white one.

                                                                                                                    Timesteps




Figure 3: Qualitative results of our framework on the real-world manipulation setup using the 6-DoF
Realman robot arm. Top row: Picking the blue cup and placing it in the bowl on top of the plate.
Bottom row: Stacking the blue cup on top of the white cup. Images are shown across timesteps.


be performed either by (i) adding an additional head that decodes the latent action representation
into the ground-truth action space, or (ii) reinitializing the final action latent layer to match the
dimensionality of the ground-truth action space and training it accordingly. In our implementation,
we adopt the second strategy, reinitializing only the last action latent layer during finetuning as
LAPA [29] demonstrated that this works better empirically.
For both BAKU [17] and Diffusion Policy [5], finetuning adapts the pretrained imitation learning
model ILθ to predict ground-truth actions from a collected demonstration dataset D. Each observa-
tion ot = (xt,view1 , xt,view2 , c, pt ) may contain one or two image views, a language instruction c, and
proprioceptive state pt . Given ot , the model predicts an action sequence ât:t+n−1 = ILθ (ot ). The
finetuning objective can be written as:

                                                       1 n
                                   LIL (θ ) =            ∑ |ℓact (ât+k−1 , at+k−1 ) .                                  (8)
                                                       n k=1           {z         }
                                                                    Action prediction loss


Here, ℓact denotes the supervised action loss used by the chosen imitation learning architecture, such
as a likelihood-based loss for BAKU or a denoising loss for Diffusion Policy. Through this stage, the
imitation learning model learns to map image-text inputs to explicit actions, aligning its predictions
with supervised ground-truth demonstrations.


4     Experiments

We focus on answering the following research questions:

       • Q1. Can LAWM learn superior priors compared to pretraining with ground-truth actions?
       • Q2. How does LAWM perform compared to recent similar methods like villa-X?
       • Q3. Do the learned latent actions correlate with ground-truth actions?

4.1   Benchmarks and Environments

We evaluate LAWM on diverse datasets and environments for both large-scale pretraining and down-
stream finetuning, including BridgeData v2, a large-scale robot manipulation dataset, Something-
Something v2, a human video dataset featuring interactions with everyday objects, LIBERO, a sim-
ulation benchmark for robotic manipulation, and a custom real-world robot manipulation setup.
These benchmarks cover a broad range of manipulation tasks and evaluation settings. Additional
details regarding the datasets, task suites, and environments are provided in the Appendix C.


                                                                    5
4.2   Baselines and Experimental Setup

We evaluate LAWM with two imitation learning baselines: BAKU [17] and Diffusion Policy [5]. To
address our research questions (Q1–Q3), we design the following experiments (E1–E3):
E1. Latent action priors vs. ground-truth pretraining. We establish two performance bounds
on the LIBERO-90 benchmark. First, the baseline models are trained from scratch on LIBERO-
90. Second, baseline models are pretrained on the ground-truth actions from BridgeData v2 [32],
then finetuned on LIBERO-90. To evaluate our approach relative to these bounds, we pretrain our
framework on each of Something-Something v2 [33] and BridgeData v2 [32] without action labels,
followed by finetuning on LIBERO-90.
E2. Comparison with similar methods. We pretrain a Diffusion Policy on human videos from
Something-Something v2 dataset, then finetune on the LIBERO task suites (Spatial, Object, Goal,
and Long), same as villa-X [7] and UniVLA [30], to enable direct comparison. We also compare
with other state-of-the-art models pretrained with supervised learning on ground-truth actions and
VLAs that are initialized from VLMs trained on internet scale data.
E3. Correlation of latent and ground-truth actions. To quantify the correlation between our
learned latent actions and ground-truth actions, we use Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA). CCA
finds linear transformations of two sets of variables such that their representations are maximally
correlated. Given latent actions Z ∈ Rn×p and ground-truth actions Y ∈ Rn×q , CCA finds weight
vectors a ∈ R p and b ∈ Rq that maximize the correlation between transformed variables u and v.

                                         u = Za,       v = Y b,                                    (9)

CCA produces pairs of canonical components (ui , vi ) that capture the linear correlations between
latent and ground-truth actions, ordered from strongest to weakest. The first pair (u1 , v1 ), known
as the first canonical components has the strongest correlation. The correlation factor is simply the
Pearson correlation coefficient between transformed variables u and v.

                                                cov(u, v)
                                       ρ=p          p                                             (10)
                                              var(u) var(v)

Where cov(u, v) denotes the covariance between u and v, and var(u), var(v) are their variances.


5     Results & Discussion

We present quantitative and qualitative results of our framework across the LIBERO benchmark, its
task suites, and a real-world setup, followed by a discussion of our findings. We use a DreamerV3
world model with a 50M-parameter configuration and a latent action space of dimension 7, matching
the dimensionality of the ground-truth actions. The action chunk size is set to 10 future actions
for BAKU experiments and 16 for Diffusion Policy experiments. Performance is evaluated using
Success Rate (SR), defined as the percentage of successful trials over the total number of attempts.
Results are reported across three random seeds, with 30 evaluation trials per task in LIBERO and 10
evaluation trials in the real-world setup. Additional training details are provided in the Appendix B.
R1. Latent action priors vs. ground-truth pretraining. We use BAKU and Diffusion Policy on
LIBERO-90 tasks as baselines. An interesting finding is that pretraining on robotics or human video
datasets without ground-truth actions, when combined with world models, can outperform super-
vised pretraining on action labels. We hypothesize that supervised pretraining on actions, forces the
model to map observations to actions, which can cause it to overfit to the distribution of BridgeData
v2 actions (specific robots, trajectories, task setups). However, world model pretraining encour-
age the model to learn state transitions and dynamics. This generalizes better when finetuned on
downstream tasks, since the dynamics are more universal across tasks than a specific embodiment.


                                                   6
(a) Success rates of BAKU on LIBERO-90 under           (b) Success rates of Diffusion Policy on LIBERO-
different pretraining strategies.                      90 under different pretraining strategies.
Figure 4: Comparison of success rates under different pretraining strategies for (a) BAKU and (b)
Diffusion Policy on LIBERO-90 benchmark. WM = world modeling without action labels.


Results on LIBERO-90

As shown in Figure 4, Training from scratch provides baselines of 91.4% (BAKU) and 85.7% Diffu-
sion Policy, while supervised pretraining on BridgeData improves performance to 92.7% and 91.9%,
respectively. World modeling pretraining results in improvement: BAKU reaches 93.7% with
BridgeData (WM) and 92.6% with Something-Something (WM), while Diffusion Policy achieves
93.0% and 91.9% under the same settings. These results highlight that world modeling not only
reduces reliance on action labels but can match or surpass supervised pretraining across models.

Results on Real-world setup

Pretraining our framework solely on human videos from the Something-Something v2 dataset sig-
nificantly improves performance on real-world tasks, achieving near-perfect success rates across five
custom downstream tasks. Training only on our custom dataset without pretraining gives an average
success rate of 84%, which increases to 94% with our pretraining framework. As shown in Table 1,
these results show that world modeling improves performance not just in simulation but also in real-
world tasks. The qualitative results of our framework on real-world testing are shown in Figure 3,
demonstrating the ability of our approach to handle complex real-world scenarios.

         Table 1: Success Rates (%) on five tasks from the real-world manipulation setup.

              Model                       Pick-and-place       Move    Stack   Average
                                         1       2       3
              BAKU w/o latent [17]      80.0   100.0   90.0    70.0     80.0     84.0
              BAKU w/ latent (Ours)     90.0   100.0   90.0    90.0    100.0     94.0


R2. Comparison with similar methods. We compare our framework using the diffusion policy
model with other state-of-the-art models on the LIBERO task suites (Spatial, Object, Goal, Long).
Table 2 compares three categories of models: 1) Models pretrained on ground-truth robotics actions
(Octo [34], OpenVLA [3], π0 [4]). 2) Models initialized from VLMs trained on internet scale
data (π0 [4] initialized from PaliGemma [35] and smolVLA [36] from smolVLM [37]). 3) Models
with a similar objective to ours, relying on human videos, robot videos, or a mix of both, such as
LAPA [29], UniVLA [30], and villa-X [7]. We first train the diffusion policy on the LIBERO task
suites without any pretraining. Providing a baseline that underperforms UniVLA and villa-X, with


                                                 7
Table 2: Baseline models’ performance comparison across LIBERO task suites. Reported SR scores
are taken directly from the original publications. LAPA results are reproduced by UniVLA authors.
    Model                               Pretraining Method     Spatial   Object     Goal   Long    Average
    Octo [34]                           Robot Actions            78.90   85.70     84.60   51.10    75.10
    OpenVLA [3]                         Robot Actions            84.70   88.40     79.20   53.70    76.50
    π0 [4]                              Robot Actions            90.00   86.00     95.00   73.00    86.00
    π0 (Paligemma-3B) [4]               VLM Checkpoint           87.00   63.00     89.00   48.00    71.80
    SmolVLA (SmolVLM-2.25B) [36]        VLM Checkpoint           93.00   94.00     91.00   77.00    88.75
    LAPA [29]                           Mix Videos               73.80   74.60     58.80   55.40    65.70
    UniVLA [30]                         Human Videos             91.20   94.20     90.20   79.40    88.70
    villa-X [7]                         Mix Videos               97.50   97.00     91.50   74.50    90.10
    Diffusion Policy w/o latent [5]     None                     88.10   81.40     87.50   70.50    81.87
    Diffusion Policy w/ latent (Ours)   Human Videos             92.70   96.30     94.20   88.00    92.80



our proposed pretraining framework on Something-Something v2 dataset, we further improve upon
the diffusion policy, achieving the best average success rate across task suites.
R3. Correlation of latent and ground-truth actions. We group actions by task type to assess
correlation across manipulation tasks. As shown in Table 3, the first canonical component achieves
strong correlations in all task categories: Put (0.9154), Move (0.9599), Remove (0.9098), and Take
(0.9541). Our method shows better correlation factors than villa-X [7] in most tasks, which we
attribute to the fact that our latent actions are predicted by an imitation learning model conditioned
on task instruction, aligning more closely with ground-truth actions. In contrast, villa-X relies on
inverse dynamics models, whose latents primarily capture scene transitions rather than actions.

                           Table 3: CCA First Coefficient per group of tasks

                         Method              Put        Move       Remove         Take
                         villa-X [7]       0.7863       0.9174      0.9955    0.9270
                         LAWM (Ours)       0.9154       0.9599      0.9098    0.9541


6   Limitations

Despite the proposed improvements, this work still has limitations. First, jointly training an imi-
tation learning model and a world model can be computationally expensive, especially with recent
VLAs and world models with billions of parameters. Second, training the world model with MSE
image reconstruction is known for rewarding pixel accuracy over task-relevant dynamics (blur, back-
ground shortcuts). Adding perceptual loss, optical flow loss, or masked modeling could help reduce
shortcut learning. Third, the world model is trained only on single-view visual observations, ignor-
ing multi-view inputs, proprioceptive data, and gripper states. This may limit its understanding of
manipulation dynamics and scene geometry. Including these sources of information could help the
model learn more physically grounded latent actions. We leave these explorations for future work.

7   Conclusion

In this paper, we introduce LAWM, a Latent Action pretraining framework for imitation learning
models to learn high-quality action representations through World Modeling from unlabeled videos.
We demonstrate that our method improves model performance in downstream tasks compared to
supervised pretraining in the LIBERO benchmark and real-world setup. We also show that our
method can be applied to human demonstration videos, where explicit action information is absent
and the embodiment gap is substantial. LAWM provides a scalable way to learn action priors without
relying on action labels. We expect that our work will open up the potential for building foundation
models for robotics by pretraining large models on much larger web-scale video data.


                                                    8
References
 [1] OpenAI. ChatGPT. https://chat.openai.com, 2025.
 [2] Google. Gemini. https://gemini.google.com, 2025.
 [3] M. J. Kim, K. Pertsch, S. Karamcheti, T. Xiao, A. Balakrishna, S. Nair, R. Rafailov, E. Foster,
     G. Lam, P. Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2406.09246, 2024.
 [4] K. Black, N. Brown, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai, L. Groom, K. Hausman,
     B. Ichter, et al. π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2410.24164, 2024.
 [5] C. Chi, Z. Xu, S. Feng, E. Cousineau, Y. Du, B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake, and S. Song. Diffusion
     policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. The International Journal of Robotics
     Research, page 02783649241273668, 2023.
 [6] D. Hafner, J. Pasukonis, J. Ba, and T. Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains through world
     models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104, 2023.
 [7] X. Chen, H. Wei, P. Zhang, C. Zhang, K. Wang, Y. Guo, R. Yang, Y. Wang, X. Xiao, L. Zhao,
     et al. Villa-x: enhancing latent action modeling in vision-language-action models. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2507.23682, 2025.
 [8] B. Liu, Y. Zhu, C. Gao, Y. Feng, Q. Liu, Y. Zhu, and P. Stone. Libero: Benchmarking knowl-
     edge transfer for lifelong robot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
     36:44776–44791, 2023.
 [9] G. Zhou, Y. Hong, and Q. Wu. Navgpt: Explicit reasoning in vision-and-language navigation
     with large language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
     volume 38, pages 7641–7649, 2024.
[10] G. Zhou, Y. Hong, Z. Wang, X. E. Wang, and Q. Wu. Navgpt-2: Unleashing navigational
     reasoning capability for large vision-language models. In European Conference on Computer
     Vision, pages 260–278. Springer, 2024.
[11] M. Mansour, A. Aly, B. Tharwat, S. Hashmi, D. An, and I. Reid. Language and planning
     in robotic navigation: A multilingual evaluation of state-of-the-art models. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2501.05478, 2025.
[12] L. H. K. Wong, X. Kang, K. Bai, and J. Zhang. A survey of robotic navigation and manipulation
     with physics simulators in the era of embodied ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.01458, 2025.
[13] B. Zitkovich, T. Yu, S. Xu, P. Xu, T. Xiao, F. Xia, J. Wu, P. Wohlhart, S. Welker, A. Wahid,
     et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In
     Conference on Robot Learning, pages 2165–2183. PMLR, 2023.
[14] A. O’Neill, A. Rehman, A. Maddukuri, A. Gupta, A. Padalkar, A. Lee, A. Pooley, A. Gupta,
     A. Mandlekar, A. Jain, et al. Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models:
     Open x-embodiment collaboration 0. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
     Automation (ICRA), pages 6892–6903. IEEE, 2024.
[15] M. Oquab, T. Darcet, T. Moutakanni, H. Vo, M. Szafraniec, V. Khalidov, P. Fernandez, D. Haz-
     iza, F. Massa, A. El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193, 2023.
[16] X. Zhai, B. Mustafa, A. Kolesnikov, and L. Beyer. Sigmoid loss for language image pre-
     training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pages
     11975–11986, 2023.


                                                 9
[17] S. Haldar, Z. Peng, and L. Pinto. Baku: An efficient transformer for multi-task policy learning.
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:141208–141239, 2024.
[18] E. Perez, F. Strub, H. De Vries, V. Dumoulin, and A. Courville. Film: Visual reasoning with
     a general conditioning layer. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
     volume 32, 2018.
[19] T. Z. Zhao, V. Kumar, S. Levine, and C. Finn. Learning fine-grained bimanual manipulation
     with low-cost hardware. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705, 2023.
[20] E. Alonso, A. Jelley, V. Micheli, A. Kanervisto, A. J. Storkey, T. Pearce, and F. Fleuret. Dif-
     fusion for world modeling: Visual details matter in atari. Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, 37:58757–58791, 2024.
[21] D. Hafner, T. Lillicrap, J. Ba, and M. Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning behaviors by latent
     imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603, 2019.
[22] D. Hafner, T. Lillicrap, M. Norouzi, and J. Ba. Mastering atari with discrete world models.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02193, 2020.
[23] S. Nair, A. Rajeswaran, V. Kumar, C. Finn, and A. Gupta. R3m: A universal visual represen-
     tation for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12601, 2022.
[24] K. Grauman, A. Westbury, E. Byrne, Z. Chavis, A. Furnari, R. Girdhar, J. Hamburger, H. Jiang,
     M. Liu, X. Liu, et al. Ego4d: Around the world in 3,000 hours of egocentric video. In
     Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
     18995–19012, 2022.
[25] C. Wang, L. Fan, J. Sun, R. Zhang, L. Fei-Fei, D. Xu, Y. Zhu, and A. Anandkumar. Mimicplay:
     Long-horizon imitation learning by watching human play. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12422,
     2023.
[26] Y. Du, S. Yang, B. Dai, H. Dai, O. Nachum, J. Tenenbaum, D. Schuurmans, and P. Abbeel.
     Learning universal policies via text-guided video generation. Advances in neural information
     processing systems, 36:9156–9172, 2023.
[27] J. Bruce, M. D. Dennis, A. Edwards, J. Parker-Holder, Y. Shi, E. Hughes, M. Lai,
     A. Mavalankar, R. Steigerwald, C. Apps, et al. Genie: Generative interactive environments. In
     Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
[28] D. Schmidt and M. Jiang. Learning to act without actions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10812,
     2023.
[29] S. Ye, J. Jang, B. Jeon, S. Joo, J. Yang, B. Peng, A. Mandlekar, R. Tan, Y.-W. Chao, B. Y. Lin,
     et al. Latent action pretraining from videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.11758, 2024.
[30] Q. Bu, Y. Yang, J. Cai, S. Gao, G. Ren, M. Yao, P. Luo, and H. Li. Univla: Learning to act
     anywhere with task-centric latent actions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.06111, 2025.
[31] X. Li, K. Hsu, J. Gu, K. Pertsch, O. Mees, H. R. Walke, C. Fu, I. Lunawat, I. Sieh, S. Kir-
     mani, et al. Evaluating real-world robot manipulation policies in simulation. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2405.05941, 2024.
[32] H. R. Walke, K. Black, T. Z. Zhao, Q. Vuong, C. Zheng, P. Hansen-Estruch, A. W. He, V. My-
     ers, M. J. Kim, M. Du, et al. Bridgedata v2: A dataset for robot learning at scale. In Conference
     on Robot Learning, pages 1723–1736. PMLR, 2023.
[33] R. Goyal, S. Ebrahimi Kahou, V. Michalski, J. Materzynska, S. Westphal, H. Kim, V. Haenel,
     I. Fruend, P. Yianilos, M. Mueller-Freitag, et al. The” something something” video database
     for learning and evaluating visual common sense. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
     conference on computer vision, pages 5842–5850, 2017.


                                                 10
[34] O. M. Team, D. Ghosh, H. Walke, K. Pertsch, K. Black, O. Mees, S. Dasari, J. Hejna,
     T. Kreiman, C. Xu, et al. Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2405.12213, 2024.
[35] L. Beyer, A. Steiner, A. S. Pinto, A. Kolesnikov, X. Wang, D. Salz, M. Neumann, I. Alabdul-
     mohsin, M. Tschannen, E. Bugliarello, et al. Paligemma: A versatile 3b vlm for transfer. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2407.07726, 2024.
[36] M. Shukor, D. Aubakirova, F. Capuano, P. Kooijmans, S. Palma, A. Zouitine, M. Aractingi,
     C. Pascal, M. Russi, A. Marafioti, et al. Smolvla: A vision-language-action model for afford-
     able and efficient robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01844, 2025.

[37] A. Marafioti, O. Zohar, M. Farré, M. Noyan, E. Bakouch, P. Cuenca, C. Zakka, L. B. Allal,
     A. Lozhkov, N. Tazi, et al. Smolvlm: Redefining small and efficient multimodal models. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2504.05299, 2025.
[38] J. Kaplan, S. McCandlish, T. Henighan, T. B. Brown, B. Chess, R. Child, S. Gray, A. Rad-
     ford, J. Wu, and D. Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.




                                                11
                                                                                Appendix


                   92                                                                                                                   92
                                                                           24


                   90                                                                                                                   90



Success rate (%)                                                                                                     Success rate (%)
                                                                           22


                   88                                          PSNR (dB)                                                                88
                                                                           20


                                            BAKU w/ latent                                                                                               BAKU w/ latent
                   86                                                      18                                                           86
                                            BAKU baseline                                       World model PSNR                                         BAKU baseline

                        1 12   25      50                100                    1 12   25       50             100                           18     20      22        24
                                    WM size (M)                                              WM size (M)                                          WM PSNR (dB)



Figure 5: Effect of world model size and reconstruction quality on BAKU performance on the
LIBERO-Long benchmark. Left: success rate improves as the world model size increases, surpass-
ing the BAKU baseline of 89%. Middle: larger world models achieve higher PSNR. Right: success
rate generally increases with world model PSNR, suggesting that improved world model prediction
quality correlates with better downstream policy performance.


A                   Additional Experiments

In addition to the main results, we conduct a series of experiments to better understand the properties
of action priors learned from large-scale human manipulation videos. Specifically, we investigate
(1) how scaling the world model affects downstream performance and reconstruction quality, (2)
whether pretraining reduces the amount of expert robot demonstrations required during finetuning,
(3) whether pretrained policies solve tasks more efficiently at test-time, and (4) qualitative results of
image pairs that exhibit similar latent actions and results of world model rollouts.

A.1                     Scaling World Model Size

We investigate how the capacity of the pretrained world model affects downstream robotic manip-
ulation performance. Specifically, we train world models with different numbers of parameters on
the Something-Something v2 dataset, and then use the learned representations to finetune BAKU on
the challenging LIBERO-Long benchmark.
Figure 5 shows that increasing the world model size consistently improves its visual prediction
quality. The Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), which represents the reconstructed image quality,
increases from 17.65 for the 1M-parameter model to 23.75 for the 100M-parameter model, indicat-
ing that larger world models learn more accurate predictive representations. This trend suggests that
world model prediction quality benefits directly from increased model capacity.
More importantly, this improvement in world model quality translates to better downstream finetun-
ing performance. The LIBERO-Long success rate increases from 86.7% with the 1M world model
to 91.0% with the 50M and 100M models. Smaller world models remain below the BAKU baseline
of 89.0%, whereas larger models surpass it, reaching 90.0% at 25M parameters and 91.0% at 50M
parameters. This suggests that sufficiently large world models provide more useful representations
for downstream policy finetuning.
However, we observe that downstream performance begins to saturate at larger model sizes. Al-
though PSNR continues to improve when scaling the world model from 50M to 100M parameters,


                                                                                        12
the success rate remains fixed at 91.0%. This indicates that improved visual prediction quality alone
may not always yield proportional gains in downstream control once the policy reaches a certain
performance level. Consistent with scaling-law behavior [38], we hypothesize that further gains
may require scaling both the world model capacity and the amount of pretraining data. Since our
current experiments use only 10% of Something-Something v2, increasing the data scale together
with model size may allow larger world models to learn richer predictive representations and further
improve downstream manipulation performance.


A.2   Reducing Expert Demonstration Requirements

A key motivation for pretraining is to reduce the amount of expert robot data required for down-
stream finetuning. To evaluate this, we finetune a policy pretrained on human video data with vary-
ing numbers of expert robot demonstrations and compare its performance against a diffusion policy
baseline trained without latent pretraining on the LIBERO-Long benchmark.
Starting from the standard setting of 50 expert demonstrations, we evaluate finetuning with 5, 10,
20, 30, 40, and 45 demonstrations, corresponding to 10%, 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, and 90% of the
full demonstration budget. Figure 6 shows that increasing the number of finetuning demonstrations
generally improves the performance of the pretrained policy, with the success rate rising from 46.0%
with 5 demonstrations to 88.0% with 50 demonstrations.
Importantly, latent pretraining enables effective finetuning with substantially fewer expert demon-
strations. With only 20 demonstrations, the pretrained policy achieves a success rate of 77.0%, out-
performing the baseline diffusion policy trained from scratch with the full 50 demonstrations, which
achieves 70.5%. Since 20 demonstrations correspond to only 40% of the full 50-demonstration set-
ting, this means that the pretrained policy requires less than half of the expert robot demonstrations
while still surpassing the fully trained baseline.
These results indicate that the action priors learned during pretraining substantially improve the
sample efficiency during finetuning. In particular, latent pretraining reduces the dependence on
costly expert robot demonstrations and enables the policy to achieve strong downstream performance
even in relatively low-data finetuning regimes.




                                   90




                Success rate (%)
                                   80

                                   70

                                   60

                                   50                               Diffusion Policy w/ latent
                                                                    Diffusion Policy Baseline
                                   40
                                        5   10       20           30          40   45     50
                                                 Number of expert demonstrations

Figure 6: Success rate of diffusion policy on the LIBERO-Long benchmark as a function of the num-
ber of expert demonstrations used for finetuning. The dashed horizontal line denotes the baseline
trained from scratch on 50 demonstrations (100%) achieving 70.5%, while the red line shows that
increasing the number of finetuning demonstrations consistently improves performance, achieving
88.0% with 50 demonstrations.



                                                           13
A.3     Task Completion Efficiency

Beyond task success, we investigate whether pretraining improves the efficiency with which policies
complete tasks. Specifically, we measure the average number of environment steps required to
successfully solve tasks after finetuning.
Table 4 compares a pretrained and a non-pretrained diffusion policy on the LIBERO task suites. We
find that the model initialized from pretrained world models completes tasks in fewer interaction
steps on average, requiring an average of 81 steps compared to 102 steps for policies trained from
scratch, which is a 20% reduction in completion steps. This result suggests that pretraining not only
improves success rates but also leads to more efficient behavior.

               Table 4: Number of completion steps across task suites. Lower is better.

           Method                              Spatial   Object   Goal    Long     Average
           Diffusion Policy Baseline             94        62       82     170         102
           Diffusion Policy w/ latent (Ours)     89        49       54     133          81


A.4     Qualitative Results

A.4.1    Latent Actions Similarity
We perform a qualitative analysis of the learned latent actions by computing the cosine similarity
between latent action representations, and then visualize the corresponding image pairs with high
similarity scores. As shown in Figure 7, these pairs correspond to similar underlying robot behav-
iors, highlighting that the learned latent action captures a meaningful action-related structure.




  Put the cube                Move the red         Remove the yellow             Take the red


                 Figure 7: Examples of image pairs exhibiting similar latent actions


A.4.2    World Model Rollouts
We further visualize qualitative examples of world model rollouts after the pretraining stage. Given
an initial frame and a predicted action chunk from the imitation learning model, the world model
predicts the future frames. We emphasize that high-fidelity video generation is not an objective of
our approach, since the world model is not used in any further stages. Instead, these rollouts serve
as a qualitative check that the learned latent actions are grounded in meaningful video dynamics.


                                                 14
As shown in Figure 8, the predicted rollouts capture coherent object motion and scene changes,
suggesting that the latent actions encode transitions that can support downstream policy finetuning.


                                                                                      Timestep


    Prediction




Ground-truth


                                                 Close The Drawer



    Prediction




Ground-truth


                                                 Open The Drawer



    Figure 8: Qualitative examples of world model rollouts using latent actions after pretraining.


B     Implementation and Training Details

Our framework consists of an imitation learning model and a world model used only during pre-
training. The imitation learning model receives image observations, a language instruction, and a
proprioceptive state. Image observations are encoded with a ResNet-18 image encoder. The model
supports two camera views, a static third-person view, and a gripper-mounted view, and both views
share the same image encoder weights. Language instructions are encoded with a CLIP text en-
coder to produce a task embedding, while proprioceptive inputs are encoded with a lightweight
MLP. The resulting image, language, and proprioceptive embeddings are fused by a fusion network.
For BAKU, the fusion module is a GPT-style transformer that receives a sequence of tokens con-
taining the language embedding, visual tokens from each camera view, the proprioceptive token,
and a learned action token. The output at the action token is passed to an MLP action head that
predicts a chunk of future actions. For Diffusion Policy, the image and proprioceptive embeddings
are concatenated and projected into an observation embedding, which is then concatenated with the
language embedding and used as global conditioning for a conditional one-dimensional U-Net. The
U-Net serves as the action prediction head and denoises a sequence of noisy actions using a DDIM
diffusion process.
During pretraining, the framework uses a single image view and the text instruction, while the sec-
ond camera view and proprioceptive inputs are set to zero. Importantly, the full imitation learning
model architecture is still instantiated during pretraining, which keeps the network structure iden-
tical between pretraining and finetuning. Since the image encoder is shared across camera views,
the encoder trained on the single available pretraining view can be reused for both views during
finetuning. The proprioceptive encoder is also present during pretraining but receives zero inputs, so
it begins learning meaningful proprioceptive representations during finetuning. The world model,
Dreamerv3, which is only used in pretraining, consists of an image encoder that maps images to
latent states, a recurrent dynamics model that predicts future latent states conditioned on actions,


                                                 15
Table 5: Hyperparameters used for pretraining and finetuning. All values are shared across different
datasets, simulation, and real-world experiments.
                 Pretraining                                              Finetuning

     Name                          Value                     Name                          Value
     Epochs                           50                     Epochs                          105
     Batch size                      256                     Batch size                      256
     Optimizer                    AdamW                      Optimizer                    AdamW
     Learning rate                1 × 10−4                   Learning rate                1 × 10−4
     Weight decay                 1 × 10−6                   Weight decay                 1 × 10−6
     Gradient clipping               100                     Gradient clipping               100
     Image resolution                128                     Image resolution                128
     Task embedding dimension        512                     Task embedding dimension        512
     Latent Action dimension           7                     Action dimension                 7
     Proprioception dimension          -                     Proprioception dimension         5
     World model enabled            True                     World model enabled            False
     Gripper camera enabled         False                    Gripper camera enabled         True
     Proprioception enabled         False                    Proprioception enabled         True



and a decoder that reconstructs images from latent states. The policy and world model use separate
image encoders; sharing these encoders is an interesting direction for future work.
During finetuning, the world model is discarded and only the imitation learning policy is optimized.
All imitation learning model components are finetuned, including the image encoder, language pro-
jection, proprioceptive encoder, fusion network, and action head. If the latent action dimension used
during pretraining differs from the ground-truth robot action dimension, the final action prediction
layer must be reinitialized to match the downstream action space. In our robot setup, the ground-
truth action is 7-dimensional, corresponding to a 6-DoF end-effector pose and a gripper state. Since
we use a 7-dimensional latent action space during pretraining, no action layer reinitialization is
required, and the complete pretrained policy is reused as is during finetuning.
Table 5 summarizes the hyperparameters used in both the pretraining and finetuning stages. Unless
otherwise stated, these settings are shared across all datasets, simulation experiments, and real-world
experiments.

C    Benchmarks and Environments Details

We evaluate LAWM across diverse datasets and environments that enable both large-scale pretrain-
ing and downstream finetuning. An overview of the benchmarks used in our work is shown in
Figure 9.

       • BridgeData v2 (BDv2) [32]: A large-scale dataset comprising 60,096 trajectories col-
         lected across 24 environments using a low-cost robot. It supports multi-task and multi-
         environment learning, featuring diverse manipulation tasks such as pick-and-place, push-
         ing, and folding, with over 100 objects involved.
       • Something-Something v2 (SSv2) [33]: A video dataset containing 220,847 labeled video
         clips of humans performing actions with everyday objects. Although not a robotic dataset,
         it is widely used for training models in multi-modal and temporal understanding tasks.
       • LIBERO Benchmark [8]: The LIBERO benchmark contains LIBERO-90, which are 90
         tasks spanning diverse objects, layouts, and goals, and is often used as the default evaluation
         benchmark in many works. LIBERO also has four task suites: LIBERO-Spatial evaluates
         the model performance in novel layouts with the same tasks and object types, LIBERO-
         Object evaluates the model performance with novel object types with the same tasks and
         layouts, LIBERO-Goal evaluates the model performance under novel tasks with the same
         types and layouts of objects, and LIBERO-Long evaluates the model’s performance under


                                                  16
        a diverse set of objects, layouts, and backgrounds, focusing on long-horizon tasks. Each
        task suite contains 10 tasks with 50 demonstrations per task for finetuning.
      • Real-world Setup: We further validate our approach on a real-world tabletop manipulation
        setup using a 6-DoF Realman robot arm equipped with a 1-DoF gripper. We collect a
        custom dataset comprising five tasks: three pick-and-place tasks, one stacking task, and one
        object-moving task. Each scene was captured from two fixed, distinct camera viewpoints
        to provide multi-view observations. For each task, we recorded 50 demonstrations using
        human teleoperation with a Meta Quest VR controller. The task instructions are:
        Pick-and-Place: (i) Put both cups on the plate, (ii) Pick the blue cup and place it in the
        bowl which is on top of the plate, (iii) Pick the pineapple out of the pot and place it in
        between the cups; Move: Move the pineapple to the pot and the roll to the plate; Stack:
        Stack the blue cup on top of the white one.




                    Figure 9: Benchmarks used for pretraining and finetuning.


D    Compute Resources

All experiments were conducted on a single A100 GPU with default settings, unless otherwise spec-
ified: a DreamerV3 world model with 50M parameters configuration and a latent action space of
dimension 7, the same dimension as the ground-truth actions. The action chunk size is set to 10
future actions for BAKU experiments and 16 for Diffusion Policy experiments. We only use 10%
of the Something-Something v2 dataset for pretraining. With these settings, pretraining on each of
the datasets BridgeData v2 and Something-Something v2 requires approximately 48 hours, while
finetuning on LIBERO-90 takes around 24 hours, and finetuning on the LIBERO suites (Spatial,
Object, Goal, Long) takes approximately 3 hours each. Finetuning on our custom real-world dataset
takes only about 20 minutes.




                                                17
